Final Planning Report

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

CHAPTER

PLAN IMPLEMENTATION
DDC-DATEX

4-1

Final Planning Report

Chapter 4: Planning Implementation

CHAPTER 4

PLAN IMPLEMENTATION
4.0

INTRODUCTION
This Chapter deals with such issues as, where the development will be done on priority basis, phasing
of development, the public sector action programs for implementing the plan, land management and
development control.

4.1

AREA DEVELOPMENT PRIORITIES
Virtually, it is not possible to start implementation of all DADP proposed infrastructures and other
development proposals in all areas at a time. The first problem to be encountered is the limitation of
resources on the part of KDA as well as other government bodies responsible for DADP execution.
Besides, one has to be judicious about the possibility of private sector investment in areas where
infrastructure will be provided on priority basis. If KDA provides infrastructure, but the land owners are
not found responsive to the facilities provided, that is, they fail to come up with constructions within a
reasonable time period, then the investment made in development of the infrastructure will not be
worthwhile. The facilities will remain under-utilized for long. So, the area to be chosen for priority
investment in infrastructure, has to be decided based on strong logic so that the public sector
investment made in those areas go adequately to use. The consultant feels that any decision on area
selection for priority investment in infrastructure should be based on the following four criteria




Review of the current trend of spatial growth, that is, the intensity of physical growth in the area;
Analysis of the availability of connectivity with the main activity hubs of the city;
Consideration of location of important public establishments and work places in close proximity;
Consideration of the access to utility and community services.

Considering the above criteria, analysis of recent spatial growth around the city, it is apprehended that
south and south-western fringe areas should get priority for infrastructural development. These areas
fulfill all the four criteria in a reasonably better way than other parts of the project area. For the same
reasons, in Noapara, western and southern parts of the town seem feasible for development
prioritization. The next area can be the development gap area between main Khulna and Daulatpur.
This area so far has been a buffer zone in between the two developed parts of the project area-Khulna
main town and Daultapur town. Other areas may be taken up sequentially, in future, after observation of
the trend and level of spatial growth in those areas. A phasing of development of areas has been
presented in the following sections.

DDC-DATEX

4-2

Final Planning Report

4.2

Chapter 4: Planning Implementation

PHASING OF DEVELOPMENT

4.2.1 Detailed Planning Zone
The consultant has developed 27 Detailed Area Development Planning Zones (DADP Zone) in the
project area to systematize DADP preparation and enable phasing out their implementation. The criteria
adopted for creating DADP zone are, intensity of physical growth in mouza and ward and population
growth pattern. In City Corporation and Paurashava, wards have been taken as the primary unit of
DADP zone, while for Extended Area, mouza has been considered as the unit of DADP zone. Based on
these criteria the entire Project Area has been categorized into 27 zones. Map-4.1 shows the DADP
Zones.
4.2.2 Phasing of Zone wise Development
The following table shows the zone wise phasing of development to be carried out. The phasing is
based on priority of development need depending on potentiality of the area. The phases have been
designed five years each. Consultant has selected 13 DADP Zones for the first phase and 14 zones for
the 2nd Phase.
Table-4.1: Phasing of Development

Phase-1: 2014-2018
01. DADP Zone-1
02. DADP Zone-2
03. DADP Zone-3
04. DADP Zone-10
05. DADP Zone-12
06. DADP Zone-16
07. DADP Zone-17
08. DADP Zone-18
09. DADP Zone-20
10. DADP Zone-21
11. DADP Zone-22
12. DADP Zone-23
13. DADP Zone-24

DDC-DATEX

Phase-2:2019-2023
01. DADP Zone- 4
02. DADP Zone-5
03. DADP Zone-6
04. DADP Zone-7
05. DADP Zone-8
06. DADP Zone-9
07. DADP Zone-11
08. DADP Zone-13
09. DADP Zone-14
10. DADP Zone-15
11. DADP Zone-19
12. DADP Zone-25
13. DADP Zone-26
14. DADP Zone-27

4-3

Final Planning Report

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

Map- 4.1: Detailed Area Development Plan (DADP) Zones of the Study Area

DDC-DATEX

4-4

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

Final Planning Report

4.3

PUBLIC SECTOR ACTION PROGRAMME FOR PRIORITY PROJECTS
Table-4.2 shows a list of four priority projects that need to be implemented in those areas that are
likely to face urbanization in a near future. The table shows the public sector agencies made
responsible for their implementation. KDA should pursue these agencies to expedite the
implementation process.
Table-4.2: Priority Projects for Public Sector Action Program
Financial Year
of
Implementation
1. Secondary Road from Khulna2014-2015
Satkhira Road at Lion’s School to
City Bypass
2.
Metropolitan
Park
at
2014-2015
Mathabhanga, Jalma Union
Project

4.4

3. Park and Play Field in Zone-2, 3

2015-2016

4. Town Centre-2 at Chak
Ashankhali, Zone-17; 20 acres

2019-2023

Agency

Justification

KDA

Create an access to the Bypass from
the southern part of the city.

KDA

Catch open space right now, before
urbanization takes place in this most
potential area.
Noapara
Create relational open space to serve
Paurashava as breathing space for the Paurashava
where open space is highly lacking.
KDA
Create economic activity in the western
periphery to expedite urbanization in
this potential urban area.

PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION MANAGEMENT
KDA, as the custodian of the DADP and its output, is responsible to oversee the implementation of
the DADP proposals. The planning section of KDA should regularly monitor execution of DADP
development proposals implementation and report it to the authority. The consultant also suggest
that KDA should develop by laws that will empower KDA to identify and take necessary action
against land use violation.
Apart from its own initiatives, KDA should also pursue other government agencies to execute their
shares of the development proposals. KDA can also negotiate with local governments to help
preserve lands delineated as roads and other developments, as their implementation may take a
long time. Many of the DADP proposals can be implemented easily if a participatory approach is
undertaken by KDA involving the land owners. For this purpose, aggressive awareness campaign
will have to be carried out with the land owners, on whose lands development proposals have
been made. NGOs may be engaged in awareness campaign, as KDA has hardly adequate
manpower to carry out field level awareness campaign.
The consultants also suggest that KDA should take necessary action to protect the water bodies
and the agricultural land use delineated in the proposal map.

DDC-DATEX

4-5

Final Planning Report

4.5

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

LAND MANAGEMENT, FINANCE, ZONING AND DEVELOPMENT CONTROL
4.5.1

Land Management

Land management is the process of managing the use and development of land. In urban area,
there can be a variety of uses of land such as, residential, commercial, and industrial;
development of land as, road; community use, such as open space, health center, fire station, and
public establishments, water resource management, etc. In urban areas there are separate public
sector agencies to carry out responsibilities of land management in different fields. In Khulna City
also there a number of public sector agencies charged with land management. Major among them
are, KDA, KCC, Water Development Board, KWASA and LGED. Within its jurisdiction, KDA is the
prime agency for land management. Its major responsibilities are infrastructure development,
development control and planning. Additionally, it is also engaged in housing development.
Following issues must be addressed for effective implementation of the DADP land development
proposals.
4.5.1.1

Land Acquisition

The present process of land acquisition is lengthy and complex. It involves the following problems


Land valuation survey is lengthy, corrupt and full mal practices where property value is
shown excessively high that raises the project cost.
The compensation paid to the land owners is not adequate to compensate loss of their
social and psychological losses they undergo. This often leads to agitation by the land
owners.

All these problems have to be resolved through amendment of the land acquisition act.
Fortunately the GoB has already taken an initiative to update the “Acquisition and Requisition of
Immovable Property Ordinance, 1982”
4.5.1.2

Resettlement

All the original settlers of the land acquisition area will have to be appropriately compensated and
resettled. This should be considered as their right and not a favour to them.
4.5.1.3

Implementation Programme

Since KDA is the custodian of DADP, and the project areas lies within its jurisdiction, the main
responsibility of DADP implementation management will rest on KDA. Following KDA Ordinance, it
should prepare its budget and financial plan based on the DADP. A large share of the land
management is supposed to be shouldered by KCC, but since no understanding has been
reached between KDA and KCC in this regard, it is very much unlikely that KCC will take over
major responsibility of execution of the DADP proposals. Because, in the past KCC did not take
any responsibility of implementing any land development project of any KDA formulated plan. So,
it is imperative that KDA should immediately sit with KCC and decide on DADP implementation
responsibilities.

DDC-DATEX

4-6

Final Planning Report

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

4.5.2 Finance
KDA finances its land development projects from two sources-government allocation fund, and its
own fund. Whatever the source of funding is, any development project has to be processed
through the Ministry Housing and Public Works and the Planning Commission depending on the
cost of the project. Since the source of funding will be the most severe hurdle in implementation of
the projects under DADP, the consultant strongly suggest that KDA should explore possibilities of
funding DADP projects through public private partnership. With a partnership projects, it would be
possible to implement local level roads in new areas. The land owners shall provide land and KDA
or KCC will develop the roads. This approach of development is possible in extended areas, where
land is still cheap and vacant. It would be almost impossible to pursue land owners to contribute
land when land price goes up. Participatory approach will help save huge public money needed for
land acquisition. For this purpose, only local level infrastructure development projects should be
selected as these would directly benefit the land owners participating in Public-Private-Partnership
(PPP) Projects.
Section 79 and 80 of the KDA Ordinance call for imposing betterment charge on the land owners
whose lands were designated for acquisition for implementation of any infrastructure development
scheme but somehow were exempted. But these land owners are enjoying the benefits of property
value rise due to improved infrastructure. But this provision of the act was never enforced. The
consultant suggest exercising the power of betterment fee immediately and raise revenue earning.
The consultant also suggest amending the law and extending the area of betterment fee quarter
km radius around the development and charging betterment free on land owners at different
degrees. This will boost earnings of the authority that can be utilized for undertaking and
implementing more development projects. For this purpose, necessary amendments will have to
be made in the KDA Ordinance.
4.5.3 Land Use Zoning and Control Management
Land use zoning is a process of designating permitted uses of land based on mapped zones which
separate one set of land use from the other. This zoning classification is based on use of land.
There are two purposes of land use zoning- to maintain environmental sanctity and to preserve the
value of land.
The Master Plan 2001 prepared a land use zoning for the area under Master Plan and divided the
entire Master Plan area into 17 land use zones. This zoning plan served as the basis for land use
permit for developers and builders. The validity of this plan was, however, expired in 2011. The
ToR asked to revise the land use zoning of 2001 Master Plan. Accordingly, the consultant carried
out a revision of the zoning plan. The revised Land Use Zoning Plan is incorporated in Chapter-3
of this report.
Land use control will be a severe problem in implementing DADP land use proposals. Past
experience does not indicate any optimistic future unless workable measures are taken. KDA must
improve its development control manpower and work out regular monitoring of development within
its jurisdiction.

DDC-DATEX

4-7

Final Planning Report

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

Punitive measures have to be applied against defaulters. Without punitive measures it would hard
to control violations of the DADP land use.
4.5.4 Development Control
Development control refers to controlling of all kinds of developments in any particular area in
accordance with the provisions of the relevant laws and regulations. Bangladesh Building
Construction Act, 1952 and the rules prepared under Section 18 of the same act serve as the main
instruments for development control. Subsequently, some more acts and regulations were framed
to supplement and support development control process. Bangladesh National Building Code
(BNBC) is one such important act. That lays down some important safety regulations for buildings.
In urban areas, Paurashava and Development Authorities, like, KDA are in charge of development
control. Other than Dhaka, Building Construction Rule 1996 is used for development control. Other
acts and rules applied as supplementary control instruments are, the Bangladesh National Building
Code 1993, Natural Water Body Protection and Preservation of Open Space and Playground Act
2000, Private Housing Estate Land Development Rules 2004, and the Master Plan of respective
urban centres. For Khulna City, 2001 Master Plan serves as a supporting document for
development control.
In the following sections a brief review has been carried out to give idea about the purpose and
functions of the development control related acts, rules and regulations.
Bangladesh Building Construction Act 1952
This is the fundamental act for development control in urban areas of the country. The act
extends to the whole of Bangladesh that makes it mandatory [Section 3(1)] to seek sanction
before making any construction. The salient features of the act are:









DDC-DATEX

No person shall erect or re-construct or make addition to any building without prior
permission of the appropriate authority [Section 3(1)];
No persons shall excavate or re-excavate any tank without prior permission
[Section 3(1)];
No building can be used for any other purpose than for which it has been given
approval (Section 3.A);
No building constructed or re-constructed or any tank excavated without prior
permission have to be removed when order is served to do so. If the owner fails to
do so, the authority shall remove it and all cost for that shall be recovered from the
owner as public demand (Section 3B);
No persons shall cut or raze any hill without prior permission;
The authority shall have the power to cancel any approved building plan for breach
of terms and conditions of the approval (Section 3C); and
For violation of the provision of the provisions of the act and the building code, the
court has the power to punish a convict with a maximum 7 years of imprisonment or
with fine of not less than Tk. Fifty thousand (Section 12).

4-8

Final Planning Report

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

Building Construction Rules 1996




Bangladesh Building Construction Act 1952, under Section 18 empowers
government to make rules to carry out the purpose of the act. Under this provision
of the act government from time to time makes necessary rules for approval of
building plans, excavation and re-excavation of tank and hill cutting;
In 1996 the government prepared Building Construction Rules that guides approval
of building plans, excavation and re-excavation of tank and hill cutting in all areas
under urban local government and Development Authorities except Dhaka. These
rules are amended and added from time to time. Following are the salient features
of the Bangladesh Building Construction Rules 1996:
 Before making construction of any building or structure and excavation of
pond, the land owner shall obtain approval of the plan of the building or
structure and its use paying specified amount of fees (Section 4);
 The design of the proposed building or structure and its submission must
follow specified rules (Section 5- 26);
 The plan has to be designed by any architect and engineer enlisted with the
approving authority (Section 6);
 Use of the building or structure must be in conformity with the land use
zoning provided in the master plan of the area (Section 10);
 The rules specify the area of land to be left vacant from side wall, back wall
and front road edge (Section 8,9,10,11);
 The rule also specifies the height of the building or floors based on width of
the front road (Section 12);
 The rules standardizes the amount of space to be reserved for car parking
within the premises of the proposed building (Section 13);
 The rule also makes special provision for designing commercial and
industrial buildings and
 Buildings of public gathering, hotel, hospital, education facilities, buildings of
seven stories or above (Section 18-26).

Based BC Rules 1996, in Noapara Paurashava area, building plans are approved by, both,
KDA and Naoapara Paurashava. This often creates confusion, which is actually empowered
to exercise the power of building plan approval. Because, by KDA Ordinance 1961 and
Local Government (Paurashava) Ordinance 2009 both the agencies are empowered to
approve building plans in Noapara. Again, according to Building Construction Act 1952,
approval to building plans is to be given according to local Master Plan land use provision of
the area concerned. KDA has already prepared its Master Plan for its area in 2001 that also
cover Noapara Pourashava. Currently, Paurashavas are also preparing their own Master
Plans. Now if Noapara Paurashava prepares its own Master Plan, than which Master Plan
should Noapara follow not only for development control purpose but also to carry out its
development works. These problems have to be resolved through an understanding
between the two controlling ministries of both the agencies.

DDC-DATEX

4-9

Final Planning Report

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

Private Housing Estate Land Development Rules 2004
This set of rules was prepared under Section 102 of the Town Improvement Act 1953 and
Section 18 of the Building Construction Act 1952, Section 13 of Natural Water body
Protection and Preservation of Open Space and Play Ground Act 2000. The rules are to be
enforced in areas covered by the Master Plans prepared under the Town Improvement Act
1953 and the Building Construction Act 1952.
Many new entrepreneurs, taking the opportunity of high demand for housing land, are
coming up with land business. They purchase low quality raw, depressed cheap land, subdivide them with minimal roads and sell them to the customers. These kinds of housing
estates do not provide community facilities, like, water, sewerage, drainage, and park, play
fielded. Even roads do not have adequate width.
These rules are meant for controlling indiscriminate growth of private housing projects. The
rules made it mandatory to take approval of the urban development authorities, the private
housing projects that has to fulfill certain conditions. Following are the salient features of the
rules:




Any entrepreneur intending to start a housing project has to register itself with the
appropriate authority (in case of Khulna, KDA) (Section 3);
The planner, architect and engineer involved in housing lay out design has to be
registered with the appropriate authority(Section 5);
The rules set some conditions for approval of a lay out plan. These include,
 Implementation of approved lay out plan within 10 years after approval
[Section 6(K)];
 Make no change in the layout plan without prior approval;
 Develop the land above the highest flood level [Section 6(O))];
 Allow free flow of water through water courses existing the site [(Section
6(P)];
 Provide necessary utility services in the housing estate [Section 6(Q)];
 The minimum size of the project will be 5 acres within Dhaka City
Corporation and 10 acres outside Dhaka City Corporation (Section 8);
 The entrepreneur can sale 70 of the project area land. 30% land cannot
be sold and used for community services and facilities, like, road, school,
market, park, community center, etc. (Section 9).

With the scarcity of land and consequent rise in price in the city core areas, housing
developers are now moving towards the city fringe in search of cheaper land. A large
number of private real estate companies are already operating in Khulna City fringe areas.
This law will make it mandatory for real estate companies to get registered with KDA and get
their lay out plans approved before selling plots to the intending customers. Thus it will help
protect public interest and create better livable environment. KDA has recently started
applying this law.

DDC-DATEX

4-10

Final Planning Report

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

Natural Water body Protection and Preservation of Open Space and Playground Act 2000
This law was enacted in the year 2000 with an intention to conserve playground, open space,
park, and natural water body in municipal areas of the country. The law applies to all
municipal areas of Bangladesh. The salient features of the act are:
circulation of Master Plan prepared for any area (Section 4);
land designated as park, playground, open space, and natural water body cannot be
changed to any other use except the provision provided in this act (Section 5);
for any change in use the land, the owner shall have to apply to the government
through the appropriate authority with necessary justifications (Section 6);
Violation of any provision of this act shall cause maximum 5 years imprisonment or
maximum fine of Tk. 50 thousand (Section 8).
Application of this law is very slack in Khulna, particularly; water bodies are
frequently being filled up here.







Bangladesh National Building Code (BNBC)
National Building Code was prepared in 1993 with a view standardize building
construction to ensure safety and conserve buildings of heritage. This code was later on
converted into rules and enforced under Section 18 of the Bangladesh Building
Construction Act 1952 in 2006. The codes specify and standardize general building
construction requirements, control and regulation. The National Building Code deals with
such issues as,










measures of fire protection in the building;
use of standard building materials;
conditions for structural design;
conditions for safety measures during construction;
building services to be provided by the developer;
procedures for alteration, addition and change of use of existing building;
procedures and systems of sign and outdoor display;
Buildings to be preserved as national heritage.
These codes are particularly important for large buildings. Adherence to the codes
is checked by KDA during approval of plans.

Brick Manufacturing (Control) Act 1989
This act was enacted to control and regulate indiscriminate growth of brick kilns endangering
environment through emission of smoke and use of fire wood to protect tree and forest. The act
covers the entire country. Following are the salient features of the act:



DDC-DATEX

License will have to be procured from Deputy Commissioner’s office before
starting operation of brick kiln (Section 4);
The owner must erect a chimney of at least 120 high to emit smoke created by
the kiln (DOE Paripatra, Sl.1; Date: 20-10-2002).

4-11

Final Planning Report










Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

No brick kiln will be accorded license located within three kilometers from
[Section 4(5)]; Upazila HQ;
Reserved and conserved forest;
Any forest acquired by the government or transferred to the government;
City Corporation, Paurashava or residential area (at least fifty houses) or orchard;
An investigation Committee will be set up comprising a representative of DC (not
less than Additional Deputy Commissioner), administrator of the Upazila Health
Complex, Officer in Charge of the Directorate of Environment (in case there is no
Officer of DOE, the Forest Officer will be the member), Chairman of the
concerned Union Parishad. The committee shall investigate the facts provided by
the applicant intending to set up brick kiln and submit a report.
Brick cannot be burnt with fire wood (Section 6);
Any violation of the provision of the act shall cause imprisonment of one year or a
fine of maximum Tk. 50 thousand (Section 7).

Earth in Khulna City surroundings is not suitable for making brick. So, brick kilns are not found
adjacent to Khulna City. They are available at Fultala and beyond, where suitable soil is available
for brick making. Due to low level of construction in Khulna City brick business large number of
brick business did not flourish here. So the city air is not in any threat from brick kiln pollution.
4.5.5 Enforcement of Legal Measures of Building Construction
Despite prevalence of necessary acts, rules and regulations, unruly development practices are
rampant all around. This is happening because there is serious slack in enforcement of law and
control mechanism. Not only that the relevant controlling agencies are poorly equipped with
manpower and logistics but also that mismanagement and corruption are widespread that create
serious obstacles to enforcement of regulatory mechanisms. KDA has to be more vigilant about
enforcement. It needs to improve its manpower position and strengthen its monitoring activity.
Stern action should be taken against the violators according to law.
4.5.6 Planning Permission
Development control is done in two stages. First, the intending developer takes the planning
permission for the site where he/she wants to build a structure. The planning permission is given
based on Master Plan land use zoning provision. After the applicant is permitted to develop,
he/she moves for design of the structure to be developed in the site. There are specific rules and
regulations about the procedure to design any particular type of building. These rules are specified
in the Section 18 of Bangladesh Building Construction Act 1952. The city Master Plans usually
prepare land use zones where the master plan area is divided into several land use zones suitable
for that area. Previous plans marked each zone exclusively for a particular land use only. But, in
fact, no land use can function without existence of other supporting land uses. For example, a
residential area can hardly function without an elementary school. Since it is not mentioned either
in the Building Construction Rules or in the land use zoning plan of a master plan about setting up
of supporting land use structure it was not possible to get this kind of structures approved legally.
To get rid of this problem, we have developed some supporting regulations, where it states what
categories of land uses may be permitted or conditionally permitted and what land uses are
restricted in a particular land use zone. These regulations have been placed in Appendix-4.1
along with supporting regulation. During offering planning permission KDA will consider these
regulations. These regulations are meant to ease planning permission.
DDC-DATEX

4-12

Final Planning Report

4.6

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

COORDINATION OF DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES
There are as many as 34 government developments and service giving agencies working within
KDA area, some way or other involved in urban development and management affairs. They have
variety of objectives and functions, legal status, systems of accountability and relationship with
service recipients and with other local and national authorities. The complex relationships between
and among these institutions and stakeholders make it difficult for efficient urban management.
Conflicting interests of these agencies is a major problem of coordination. Organizations like, KCC,
Bangladesh Railway, Khulna University, Mongla port authority, Cantonment have large areas and
they usually make their own decisions within their own jurisdictions that may sometimes come in
conflict with KDA Master Plan. There are other agencies, like, LGED, Water Development Board,
KCC whose activities often come in conflict with KDA plans.
Detailed Area Plan, as a part of Master Plan, is a statutory document. It is the responsibility of all
public sector agencies, private agencies and individuals within KDA area to abide by Detailed Area
Plan document. Before taking up any development scheme all should consult KDA to see that the
projects do not violate the Detailed Area Plan provisions. A Coordination Committee may be set up
with the Chairman KDA in the Chair, where local representatives of all concerned public sector
agencies operating within KDA area will be the member. Since status of KCC Mayor is higher than
KDA Chairman, it can designate its Chief Executive Officer to represent KCC. The committee will
sit every month to review development activities within KDA area. The meeting will make aware
the members about the development projects of each agency and their progress. The members
will also convey message about their future projects and thus make coordination of development
activities. The same committee will also resolve any conflict of interest and in development
activities.
KDA holds the responsibility of all planning functions within its jurisdiction. The issue is to bring all
the public sector agencies under a common system so that they can follow the KDA development
plans for any activity on land. An effective coordination body with sufficient power can resolve this
problem.
There should be a rationale way of the implementation of plan proposals and regulations for all
citizens on an equal basis. It is the responsibility of all citizens and institutions to abide by the
rules of law. This is a serious problem in implementing plans.

4.7

EXECUTION OF DEVELOPMENT PROPOSALS
It is clear that KDA alone cannot execute all the DADP proposals. Other implementing agencies
will have to be involved actively to execute the proposals. Besides, land owners must be involved.
Any land owner on whose land has been selected for any proposed services facilities may himself
develop the facility. The facility may also be developed by any one taking over ownership of the
land or he may develop the facility in association with the landowner.

DDC-DATEX

4-13

Final Planning Report

4.8

Chapter 4: Plan Implementation

INVOLVING OTHER IMPLEMENTING AGENCIES
The current DADP contains many development proposals, which KDA alone cannot implement.
The Other relevant agencies must be involved in implementation of services and facilities that fall
within their jurisdiction of operation. The DADP has proposed many education and training
facilities. These proposals must be conveyed to the Ministry of Education, so that they can
accommodate the proposals in their future development programmes. Similarly, there are proposal
for health facilities, which also need to be conveyed to the Health and Family Planning Ministry.
There are many play field and park proposals. KDA itself can develop many of these facilities. But
it would be difficult for KDA alone to implement all of them, as it would put pressure on their limited
resources. KDA can have dialogue with KCC and Noapara Paurashava to have a shared
responsibility in implementing the facilities in their respective areas. KDA can also request
Noapara Paurashava and KCC to develop local roads in their respective areas. KDA can also
request LGED to develop major roads proposed in the DADP outside KCC and Paurashava area.

4.9

PEGGING OF RIGHT OF WAY OF PROPOSED ROADS
Pegging is a way of marking the area of development long before the development project is
implemented. The right of way of all proposed roads may be marked physically by way of pegging
to make aware of the land owners and the local people that some time in future a road would be
built there. In absence of necessary legal support, this may be done in negotiation and
understanding with the land owners on whose land proposals have been made. This will help land
owners to set aside the land earmarked as road and other facilities, before making development in
their lands. It will make land acquisition for road development easier. According to immovable
property acquisition act, government has to pay compensation for all properties, whether
authorized or unauthorized. Such pegging will also help understanding by the community
members, about the necessity of the road and services. They might create pressure on the
concerned authorities for implementation of the proposed development facilities including road.

DDC-DATEX

4-14

