Final Planning Report

Chapter-6: Follow Up

CHAPTER

FOLLOW UP
DDC-DATEX

6-1

Final Planning Report

Chapter-6: Follow Up

CHAPTER 6
FOLLOW UP

6.0

INTRODUCTION
This chapter of the DADP planning report describes some important follow up actions to be carried
out after approval of the plan. These include, additional projects to be prepared; monitoring, updating
and review of the plan; rules of plan deviation and issues related to amendment of KDA Ordinance.

6.1

ADDITIONAL PROJECT PLAN PREPARATION
DADP is a comprehensive plan that contains a large number of infrastructure development proposals.
Huge number of development projects can be prepared from these development proposals. In
Chapter-5, the consultant has prepared five sectoral projects. KDA will prepare additional
development projects for execution on area basis as and when necessary. Apart from KDA, other
agencies like, Khulna City Corporation and LGED may also prepare additional projects for local area
infrastructure development. However, as custodian of the DADP, KDA will have to make continuous
persuasion of these agencies for undertaking implementation of these projects. Because,
government agencies are usually reluctant to execute development projects of other agencies, unless
there is a prior understanding.

6.2

DURATION OF THE PLAN
DADP has been formulated for a period of 10 years. This plan will remain valid for 10 years from the
date of gazette notification of its approval by the government. A new DADP will have to be prepared
on the 10th year through revision of the current plan.

6.3

MONITORING, REVIEW AND UPDATING OF THE DETAILED AREA PLAN
A plan should be continuously monitored to see the level of its implementation and identify any
problem that might create hindrance to its implementation. The planning section of KDA should
monitor the progress of implementation every six month and report it to the higher authority with
necessary recommendations. It should carry out review and updating of DADP on the fifth year of
the plan.

6.4

RULES OF PLAN DEVIATION
Plan deviation, here, refers to deviation of DADP land use and other development proposals. Plan
deviations are common during execution of plan proposals. And such deviations are more when a
development proposal is executed long after preparation of the plan proposals. Because during this
period new developments take place (though they are unauthorized) in vacant areas out of the need

DDC-DATEX

6-2

Final Planning Report

Chapter-6: Follow Up

of the people. All the plan proposals of DADP will be depicted in the mouza map as the base map.
But it is unlikely that whatever markings will be made in the mouza map will be materialized as it is.
There will be deviations during land acquisition for many unforeseen reasons. There can be new
developments in the site which might raise development cost if the land is acquired including the
structure. The executing authority might consider changes in the location or area. There may be
pressure from local inhabitants, or even there may be pressure from high ups. In such cases,
deviations from the actual plan proposals are sometimes made by the executing authority. Such
deviations may be allowed on flexibility principle. We must understand the spirit of the plan. Spirit of
the plan is to have development, doing this there can be some deviations. But when there is
assurance of development, it means purpose of the plan is achieved and so the spirit of the plan. As
long as spirit of the plan is there deviations in plan execution may be allowed.
6.5

LEGAL ISSUES

6.5.1

Amendment of Khulna Development Authority Ordinance 1961
To cope with the changing situation and speed up development, including implementation of all its
plans, the existing Khulna Development Authority Ordinance 1961 is needed to be updated in a few
places as presented below.

6.5.1.1 Width of Street
In section 40, The Khulna Development Authority Ordinance 1961 forbids the authority not to lay out
or develop any road less than,
-

40 feet, if the road is used for vehicular traffic, and
20 feet, if the road is used for pedestrian traffic.
In fact, in Bangladesh, all roads are used by all categories of traffic modes. So, it is not practical to
designate any particular road for pedestrian movement only. This section of the Ordinance need to
be amended.

6.5.1.2 Imposing Betterment Fee on Beneficiary Land Owners
In Section 79 and 80 of the Khulna Development Authority Ordinance there is provision to impose
betterment fee on the land owners whose lands are designated for acquisition for implementation of
any infrastructure development scheme but somehow were exempted. The Act proposed to impose
betterment fee on such lands on the ground that due to infrastructure development the value of the
land has risen in adjacent areas and these land owners are enjoying the benefits of enhanced land
value at the cost of public expenses. Therefore, they should share some of their financial benefits
with the development authority.
But, so far known, no such betterment fee has yet been imposed on any land owner and realized by
KDA though it has developed many infrastructures most of which are roads. Failure to exercise the
power of charging betterment fee has deprived the authority of substantial amount of revenue. Had
DDC-DATEX

6-3

Final Planning Report

Chapter-6: Follow Up

this revenue been collected, it could have been spent on many development projects. The consultant
suggests exercising the power of betterment fee immediately and rises revenue earning. The
consultant also suggests to amend the law and extend the area of betterment fee quarter kilometer
around the development projects executed and charge betterment free on the land/property owners
in different degrees from the project location. This will boost earnings of the authority. However,
amendments have to be carried out in KDA Ordinance in this regard.
6.6

USE OF UNUSED LAND
There is plenty of unused or vacant land within the city. Since these lands are lying unused for long,
they do not go to the land market to increase supply of urban land. This situation creates pressure
on urban fringe lands and the city expands horizontally outward devouring valuable farm lands. Had
these vacant lands been put into use for housing or any other urban activity, there would have been
less pressure on agricultural lands around the city. Now, how to compel the vacant land owners to
make use of their land instead of keeping them idle for years? The worldwide strategy to stop this
tendency is to impose tax on unused or vacant land. The tax can be imposed in this way, if owner of
the land does not put his land on any effective use, after certain period of time of purchase or
inheritance of the land, the land owner shall pay specific amount of tax in proportion to the land every
year. An act may be enacted for enforcement of the policy of tax on vacant land.

6.7

CIRCULATION OF PLAN DOCUMENTS
A town plan and its administrative and legal importance are yet to be comprehended not only by the
common citizenry, but also by the public sector development agencies in the city. First of all, the
relevant public sector agencies will have to be made aware that a town plan has been prepared and
that it is a statutory document and hence it is a binding on all concerned to follow the plan. It should
be adhered by them while taking up development programmes and projects within the jurisdiction of
the plan area. For these purpose copies of the plans including maps and reports will have to be sent
to them with a letter stating under what legal authority the plan has been prepared. To make the
general public’s access to the plan document, it should be placed in the KDA Website for download.
In addition, hard copies of the document may be made available for sale at reasonable price. The
plan has proposed a number of development proposals in various fields. These proposals will have
to be implemented by the concerned public sector agencies apart from KDA. It is necessary that
these public sector agencies are informed about their responsibilities with letters accompanying
copies of the plans and the plan report.

DDC-DATEX

6-4

